---
layout: page
title: About the Project
permalink: /about-project/
---

**Project Background**

Sylvester Manor is a historic property and operational farm on Shelter Island, located at the eastern end of Long Island, New York. On the ancestral lands of the Indigenous Manhansett People, Sylvester Manor was established in 1651 by Nathaniel and Constant Sylvester, Anglo-Dutch sugar merchants and enslavers who established the manor as a provisioning plantation for the family’s sugar plantations in Barbados. The original 1651 house was demolished by Brinley Sylvester and replaced by the 1737 Manor House, constructed by enslaved laborers and remains standing today. Recognized as the “most intact slaveholding plantation north of Virginia,” Sylvester Manor was farmed and worked by enslaved Africans and African Americans until 1820. Later, indentured Native American and European servants served generations of the Sylvester family. Sylvester descendent Eben Fiske Otsby created the Sylvester Manor Educational Farm in 2010 as 501(c)3 non-profit organization that seeks to continually cultivate livestock and organic produce on 60 acres of farmland; preserve the entire 236 acre property including historic gardens, burial grounds, and buildings; and educate the public about the site’s history. 

In 2008, Sylvester descendants Alice Fiske and Eben Fiske Ostby donated a large collection of materials documenting several generations of ownership and stewardship of Sylvester Manor to the Fales Library and Special Collections at New York University Libraries. 

The Sylvester Manor Archive represents a feat of archival processing and digitization labor from numerous archives students and staff. The collection was initially processed by NYU archivists Colin Wells, Liza Harrell-Edge, and Noah Gelfand from 2008 to 2010. At this time, the archive was arranged into record groups by family affiliation, then subdivided into series consisting of individuals' papers, and then chronologically. The finding aid published in 2010 consisted of record titles that described both creator and genre. The R.D.L. Gardiner Foundation later sponsored further descriptive work from 2014-2015. Additional details about materials’ physical materiality as well as biographical information about the the personal and professional lives of the Sylvester, Brinley, Lloyd, Gardiner, Horsford, and Fiske families were added to scope and content notes for Record Groups I, III, IV, and V. Financial and legal records from Record Group I (covering the Sylvester, Brindley and Dering families during the 17th century) also received  descriptive enhancements to its financial and legal records. During the course of these revisions, creator and genre information were separated into different descriptive fields; some items of similar genre or subject were consolidated; and some items received preservation treatment. The R.D.L. Foundation then supported a second major phase of conservation and digitization of the collection materials from 2016 to 2019, resulting in the addition of roughly 5,600 digital surrogates to the finding aid. 

As Dorothy Berry points out in her case study on the “Digitizing African American Archival Materials Across University of Minnesota Collection” (DAAAUMN) project, “digitization as panacea assumes both that complicated and sometimes idiosyncratic catalogs and findings contain all the information that users need for digital discovery, and furthermore that the institutional digital access points, often behind university logins and paywalls, are somehow less intimidating and prohibitive…. The key feature in providing authentic (emphasis added) accessibility, [is] in providing descriptive equity across records.” Facilitating authentic accessibility for the user communities of Sylvester Manor – which crucially includes the staff of Sylvester Manor and their audiences in Long Island – means removing the assumption that the Sylvester Manor Archive is de facto discoverable due to significant description and digitization efforts. As the finding aid grew more dense in description and laden with thumbnails of digitized items, the more difficult it became for researchers to discern the arrangement and context of items. Additionally, because the vast majority of digitized materials are handwritten manuscripts incompatible with OCR, the content of most manuscripts is almost entirely obscured. 

Furthermore, while a large amount of correspondence received “descriptive enhancements” during the 2014-2015 Gardiner Foundation-funded revision project, it is unclear what criteria was used to determine which materials warranted such enhancements and which did not. Indeed, as will be discussed in the next section, a large amount of materials referencing or pertaining to marginalized groups such as enslaved people, Indigenous people, free people of color, indentured servants, working-class Europeans, and women were not described in as much detail as those materials documenting the family patriarchs’ business activities. In addition to these descriptive disparities, the intellectual arrangement of the collection around the landowning families inadvertently obscures narratives and relationships that spanned several generations, as well as the roles of non-family members. These observations are not at all intended to be a condemnation of the years of labor contributed to this collection by NYU archivists and students. Rather, the project team sees the Sylvester Manor Archive as just one example of typical disparities in traditional descriptive, arrangement, and even digitization practices. 

Beginning in 2022, History & Heritage staff at Sylvester Manor sought to partner with NYU to generate some tool(s) that could serve as a scaffold for their staff and outside researchers to approach the Sylvester Manor Archive. 
